SPEECH
FROM THE
THRONE
to open the first session of
the 45th Parliament of Canada
BUILDING
CANADA STRONG
A bold, ambitious
plan for our future
May 27, 2025
Library and Archives Canada
Cataloguing in Publication
Building Canada Strong: A bold, ambitious plan for our future
Speech from the Throne to open the first session
of the 45th Parliament of Canada,
May 27, 2025.
Irregular.
45th Parliament, 1st session (2025)
English and French on inverted pages.
Title on added t. p.: Bâtir un Canada fort :
un plan audacieux et ambitieux pour notre avenir
Discours du Trône ouvrant la première session
de la 45º législature du Canada,
le 27 mai 2025.
ISSN 1493-3551
Cat. no. SO1-1E-PDF
Speech from the Throne–Canada–Periodicals.
Canada–Politics and government–Periodicals.
I. Title. II. Title: Bâtir un Canada fort:
un plan audacieux et ambitieux pour notre avenir
Discours du Trône ouvrant la première session
de la 45º législature du Canada,
le 27 mai 2025.
Alternate formats request or other information:
1-800-622-6232
TDD toll-free number for the hearing impaired:
1-800-926-9105
Website:
www.canada.ca/throne-speech
© His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, 2025
Photo Credits:
Cover: Gros Morne National Park, Newfoundland and Labrador
– courtesy of Jake Graham Photo
Right-hand page: Photograph by Millie Pilkington 2024
© All Rights Reserved
His Majesty King Charles III
King of Canada
Honourable Senators,
Members of the House
of Commons,
It is with a sense of deep pride and pleasure that my wife
and I join you here today, as we witness Canadians coming
together in a renewed sense of national pride, unity,
and hope.
I would like to acknowledge that we are gathered on the
unceded territory of the Algonquin Anishinaabeg people.
This land acknowledgement is a recognition of shared
history as a nation. While continuing to deepen my own
understanding, it is my great hope that in each of your
communities, and collectively as a country, a path is found
toward truth and reconciliation, in both word and deed.
This is my 20th visit to Canada, spread over the course of
more than half a century, and my first as Sovereign. As
I have said before, “Every time I come to Canada... a little
more of Canada seeps into my bloodstream – and from
there straight to my heart.” I have always had the greatest
admiration for Canada’s unique identity, which is recognized
across the world for bravery and sacrifice in defence of
national values, and for the diversity and kindness of
Canadians.
To the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Peoples – you have
welcomed my family and myself to your traditional lands with
great warmth and hospitality, for which I am humbly grateful.
This year, we mark the 80th anniversary of V-E Day and
V-J Day. On Juno Beach, at Dieppe, on the Somme, at
Beaumont-Hamel, at Ypres, and on Vimy Ridge... At those
places, and many others, forever etched into our memories,
Canadians fought and died alongside our closest allies.
Today, I see representatives from every part of Canada – from
St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, to Victoria, British
Columbia, and Arviat, Nunavut. I see the guardians of the
fundamental rights and freedoms guaranteed in the Canadian
Charter and, as King, I thank you for your service to your fellow
Canadians, across the length and breadth of this vast and
great nation.
You speak for your communities, representing an incredible
richness of cultures, languages, and perspectives. We owe it to
this generation, and those who succeed us, to think and act for
the greater good of all. While the world faces unprecedented
challenges, generating uncertainties across the continents with
regards to peace and stability, economics, and climate change,
your communities have the skills and determination to bring
a wealth of solutions.
By fostering collaboration and engaging in respectful,
constructive debates, you will ensure this Government
is capable of bold and fair action to support Canadians.
It has been nearly 70 years since the Sovereign first opened
Parliament. In the time since, Canada has dramatically
changed: repatriating its Constitution, achieving full
independence, and witnessing immense growth. Canada
has embraced its British, French, and Indigenous roots,
and become a bold, ambitious, innovative country
that is bilingual, truly multicultural, and committed
to reconciliation.
The Crown has for so long been a symbol of unity for
Canada. It also represents stability and continuity from
the past to the present. As it should, it stands proudly as
a symbol of Canada today, in all her richness and dynamism.
Opening
When my dear late mother, Queen Elizabeth II, opened
a new Canadian Parliament in 1957, the Second World
War remained a fresh, painful memory. The Cold War was
intensifying. Freedom and democracy were under threat.
Canada was emerging as a growing economic power and
a force for peace in the world. In the decades since, history
has been punctuated by epoch-making events: the Vietnam
War, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the start of the War
on Terror. Today, Canada faces another critical moment.
Democracy, pluralism, the rule of law, self-determination,
and freedom are values which Canadians hold dear, and
ones which the Government is determined to protect.
The system of open global trade that, while not perfect,
has helped to deliver prosperity for Canadians for decades,
is changing. Canada’s relationships with partners are also
changing.
We must be clear-eyed: the world is a more dangerous and
uncertain place than at any point since the Second World
War. Canada is facing challenges that are unprecedented
in our lifetimes.
Many Canadians are feeling anxious and worried about
the drastically changing world around them. Fundamental
change is always unsettling. Yet this moment is also an
incredible opportunity. An opportunity for renewal. An
opportunity to think big and to act bigger. An opportunity
for Canada to embark on the largest transformation of
its economy since the Second World War. A confident
Canada, which has welcomed new Canadians, including
from some of the most tragic global conflict zones, can
seize this opportunity by recognising that all Canadians can
give themselves far more than any foreign power on any
continent can ever take away. And that by staying true to
Canadian values, Canada can build new alliances and a
new economy that serves all Canadians.
Building new relationships
with the United States
and the world
The Prime Minister and the President of the United States,
for example, have begun defining a new economic and
security relationship between Canada and the U.S., rooted
in mutual respect and founded on common interests, to
deliver transformational benefits for both sovereign nations.
In parallel, the Government is working to strengthen its
relationships with reliable trading partners and allies around
the world, recognizing that Canada has what the world
needs and the values the world respects.
Canada is ready to build a coalition of like-minded countries
that share its values, that believe in international co-operation
and the free and open exchange of goods, services, and ideas.
In this new, fast-evolving world, Canada is ready to lead. This
will be demonstrated in June, when Canada convenes the
G7 Summit.
Building a more
affordable Canada
The Government is guided by its conviction that the
economy is only truly strong when it serves everyone.
Many Canadians are struggling to get ahead. The
Government is responding, reducing middle-class taxes
and saving two-income families up to $840 a year. It will
cut the GST on homes at or under $1 million for first-time
homebuyers, delivering savings of up to $50,000. And it
will lower the GST on homes between $1 million and
$1.5 million.
The Government will protect the programs that are already
saving families thousands of dollars every year. These
include child care and pharmacare. In addition to these,
the Government has recently expanded the Canadian
Dental Care Plan to cover about eight million Canadians,
saving the average person more than $800 per year.
Building a stronger Canada
The Government’s overarching goal – its core mission – is
to build the strongest economy in the G7. That starts with
creating one Canadian economy out of thirteen. Internal
barriers to trade and labour mobility cost Canada as much
as $200 billion each year. The Government will introduce
legislation to remove all remaining federal barriers to internal
trade and labour mobility by Canada Day.
Numerous premiers have already taken vital steps to break
down provincial and territorial barriers to trade. Together,
we will build on that progress to deliver free trade across the
nation by Canada Day. This is critical to unlocking Canada’s
full economic potential, but it’s not enough.
To build Canada strong, the Government is working closely
with provinces, territories, and Indigenous Peoples to identify
and catalyse projects of national significance. Projects that will
connect Canada, that will deepen Canada’s ties with the world,
and that will create high-paying jobs for generations.
Given the pace of change and the scale of opportunities,
speed is of the essence. Through the creation of a new
Major Federal Project Office, the time needed to approve
a project will be reduced from five years to two; all while
upholding Canada’s world-leading environmental standards
and its constitutional obligations to Indigenous Peoples.
The Government will also strike co-operation agreements
with every interested province and territory within six
months to realize its goal of “one project, one review.”
When Canadians come together, Canada builds things
that last.
By removing these barriers that have held back our
economy, we will unleash a new era of growth that will
ensure we don’t just survive ongoing trade wars, but
emerge from them stronger than ever. It will enable
Canada to become the world’s leading energy superpower
in both clean and conventional energy. To build an industrial
strategy that will make Canada more globally competitive,
while fighting climate change. To build hundreds of
thousands of good careers in the skilled trades. And to
build Canada into the world’s leading hub for science
and innovation.
Critically, the Government will undertake a series of
measures to help double the rate of home building while
creating an entirely new housing industry – using Canadian
technology, Canadian skilled workers, and Canadian lumber.
The Government will introduce measures to deliver
affordable homes by creating Build Canada Homes. This
mission-driven organization will act to accelerate the
development of new affordable housing. It will invest in the
growth of the prefabricated and modular housing industry.
And it will provide significant financing to affordable home
builders. The Government will make the housing market
work better, including by cutting municipal development
charges in half for all multi-unit housing. The Government
will drive supply up to bring housing costs down.
Building a safer and
more secure Canada
To be truly strong, Canada must be secure. To that end, the
Government will introduce legislation to enhance security
at Canada’s borders. Law enforcement and intelligence
agencies will have new tools to stop the flow of fentanyl
and its precursors. The Canada Border Services Agency will
be given new powers to examine goods destined for export,
to prevent the transport of illegal and stolen products,
including cars.
The Government will protect Canada’s sovereignty by
rebuilding, rearming, and reinvesting in the Canadian Armed
Forces. It will boost Canada’s defence industry by joining
ReArm Europe, to invest in transatlantic security with
Canada’s European partners. And it will invest to strengthen
its presence in the North, which is an integral part of
Canada, as this region faces new threats.
The Government will discharge its duty to protect
Canadians and their sovereign rights, from wherever
challenges may come at home or abroad. To keep
communities safe, the Government will hire 1,000 more
RCMP personnel. It will change firearms licensing and
strengthen enforcement of yellow and red flag laws.
Weapons licences for those convicted of intimate partner
violence and those subject to protection orders will be
revoked. Through the deployment of scanners, drones
and helicopters, additional personnel, and K-9 teams,
the Government will stem the tide of illegal guns and
drugs across the border.
It will take these steps while protecting the rights of law-
abiding gun owners and Indigenous Peoples’ longstanding
hunting traditions.
The Government will bring a renewed focus on car theft
and home invasions by toughening the Criminal Code to
make bail harder to get for repeat offenders charged with
committing these crimes, along with human trafficking and
drug smuggling.
Building a united Canada
During this time of great change, Canadians are uniting
behind what makes Canada unique.
The French language and the Quebec culture are at the
heart of the Canadian identity. They define the country
that Canadians and I love so much. Canada is a country
that respects and celebrates its official languages and
Indigenous languages. The Government is determined to
protect the institutions that bring these cultures and this
identity to the world, like CBC/Radio-Canada. It will
protect the people who give us access to fresh, healthy,
and quality food: agricultural producers. And it will protect
supply management.
Nature is core to Canada’s identity. In 2022, Canada
convened COP15 in Montréal, which concluded with
196 countries striking a historic agreement to protect
30 percent of their lands and 30 percent of waters by
2030. To this end, the Government will protect more of
Canada’s nature than ever before through the creation of
new national parks, national urban parks, marine protected
areas, and other conservation initiatives.
The Government will always protect the rights and freedoms
that the Charter guarantees for every Canadian.
The Government will be a reliable partner to Indigenous
Peoples, upholding its fundamental commitment to advancing
reconciliation. Central to this commitment is the creation of
long-term wealth and prosperity with Indigenous Peoples. For
that reason, the Government will double the Indigenous Loan
Guarantee Program from $5 billion to $10 billion – enabling
more Indigenous communities to become owners of major
projects. As Canada moves forward with nation-building
projects, the Government will always be firmly guided by
the principle of free, prior, and informed consent.
Canada’s immigration system has long been a source of
pride for Canadians and of dynamism for the economy. The
Government is dedicated to rebuilding the trust of Canadians
in immigration by restoring balance to the system.
The Government will cap the total number of temporary
foreign workers and international students to less than five
percent of Canada’s population by 2027. By doing this, the
Government will attract the best talent in the world to build
our economy, while sending a clear message to Canadians
working abroad that there is no better time to come home.
Building Canada Strong
by spending less and
investing more
In all of its actions, the Government will be guided by a new
fiscal discipline: spend less so Canadians can invest more.
Day-to-day government spending – the government’s
operating budget – has been growing by nine percent every
year. The Government will introduce measures to bring it
below two percent.
Transfers to provinces, territories, or individuals will be
maintained. The Government will balance its operating
budget over the next three years by cutting waste, capping
the public service, ending duplication, and deploying
technology to improve public sector productivity.
In parallel, the Government will take a series of measures
to catalyse new investment to create better jobs and higher
incomes for Canadians. The scale of the Government’s
initiative will match the challenges of our times and
the ambitions of Canadians.
